.. _introduction:

Introduction to RMG
===================

RMG is an automatic chemical reaction mechanism generator that constructs 
mechanisms composed of elementary chemical reaction steps using a general understanding of how hydrocarbons react. The model parameters (rate constants 
and reaction thermodynamics) are estimated using a database and the idea that the 
behavior of functional groups is somewhat independent of the molecule(s) containing them. The RMG database consists of two parts: kinetic rate rules and 
thermodynamic group additivity values. 

Benson’s Group Additivity approach, used by RMG, divides a molecule into 
functional groups, and the contribution of each functional group to the overall 
thermodynamics is included. RMG’s kinetic rate rules use a similar strategy: the 
reaction rate depends on the two functional groups involved in the reaction. The 
rate rule database uses an innovative tree structure that allows users to include 
ever-more speciﬁc deﬁnitions of the functional groups and the kinetics involving them. In both cases, users can easily modify and expand these databases 
to suit their needs. In principle, the trees could be expanded until all possible 
molecules and data for the reactions between all possible pairs of molecules have 
been included (of course, in practice, the database is much more limited). The 
kinetics database includes 19 reaction types ("families"), including hydrogen abstractions, cycloadditions, disproportionation reactions, radical recombination reactions, intramolecular rearrangements, etc. Each reaction family includes data 
on many possible functional group pairings involved in the reaction, for a total 
of roughly 1000 rate rules. When a perfect match for a given reaction is not 
found in the database, RMG estimates the rate parameters based on "nearby" 
rate rules that are similar to the desired one. In addition to modifying the RMG 
databases, the user may also enter thermodynamic or kinetic information for speciﬁc molecules/reactions into Primary Libraries which supersede the estimated 
values. In this manner, precise data for well-studied reactions/species can be included. 

To construct a mechanism, the user must specify an initial set of species and 
the initial conditions (temperature, pressure, species concentrations, etc.) RMG 
reacts the initial species in all possible ways according to its known reaction families, and it integrates the model in time. RMG tracks the rate (ﬂux) at which 
each new "edge" species is produced, and species (and the reactions producing 
them) that are produced with signiﬁcant ﬂuxes are incorporated into the model 
(the "core"). These new core species are reacted with all other core species in the 
model, to generate a new set of edge species and reactions. The time-integration 
restarts, and the expanded list of edge species is monitored for signiﬁcant species 
to be included in the core. The process continues until all signiﬁcant species and 
reactions have been included in the model. The user is free to vary the deﬁnition 
of a "significant" rate to reﬁne the mechanism as desired. For a more detailed description on rate-based model enlargement, please consult the paper "Rate-Based Construction of Kinetic Models for Complex Systems" by Roberta G. Susnow, Anthony M. Dean, William H. Green, Pawel K. Peczak, and Linda J. Broadbelt, in *Journal of Physical Chemistry A*, Vol. 101, pages 3731-40, 1997. (doi:`10.1021/jp9637690 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/jp9637690>`_)

RMG is an object-oriented program written in Java, which provides a stable, 
robust programming architecture that is easily extended, modiﬁed, and improved. 
At its core, RMG relies on two fundamental data structures: graphs and trees. The 
graphs represent the chemical structures, and the trees represent the databases of 
thermodynamic and kinetic data. Currently, RMG can generate reaction mechanisms for species involving carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and its mechanisms 
can contain many hundreds of species and tens of thousands of reactions. It is 
also capable of performing ﬁrst-order sensitivity analysis on the rate constants 
and species thermodynamics. 

RMG was developed by Dr. Jing Song under the guidance of Prof. William 
Green in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the `Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology <http://web.mit.edu/>`_. Currently the principal developer of RMG is Sandeep Sharma, a 
graudate student in Prof. William Green’s research group. 
